---
layout: post
title: "HTypes"
description: "A type-safe, asynchronous, lightweight Scala extension to the HBase API"
comments: true
keywords: "Scala, HBase, HTypes, typeclass, asynchronous, concurrent, type-safe, type, safe"
---
**Source code: [https://github.com/SvenvDam/HTypes](https://github.com/SvenvDam/HTypes)**

At my current job, we make heavy use of Apache HBase. HBase is a distributed database built on top of Hadoop and HDFS.
It is extremely performant when you need consistent and random access to data which needs to be distributed across multiple servers.
The aim of this post is not to provide an in-depth explanation of how HBase works though, 
but to describe a small extension to its (Java) API I wrote which makes it more pleasant to work with in Scala.

I mainly wrote this extension to get more familiar with typeclasses in Scala (more on this later)
and using typeclasses to map objects to a database representation seemed like a good use-case.
Besides, the developer friendliness of HBase leaves some things to be wished for and I figured adding some extensions for
boilerplate work would not hurt.
To be fair though, I've found the Java API to be quite pleasant to work with. 
Especially the construction of queries as values which can be passed around and composed before executed is great.
Hence, I wanted to provide functionalities which do not get in the way of the existing API but are just an extension to what is already there.
What I tried not to do was being clever with new ways to do things that were already possible, but then in a more 'scala-esque' way.

HTypes aims to provide three types of improvements:
* Conversion of results to Scala collections
* Asynchronous execution of queries
* Easy conversion between objects and database representations

It relies heavily on implicit classes to add extra syntax to objects provided by the HBase client API.
This makes that you as a user do not have to think about whether you should use methods provided by the core API or HTypes
since both will be available at the same place.
This also means that they can easily be combined to reach you desired goal with minimal work!

In the rest of this post, I will first give a short example of how to get up and running with HTypes.
Then I will go into the types of improvements one-by-one with code examples.
For the final improvement, I will also give an explanation of what typeclasses are and how they work in Scala since this is important to understand how it is implemented.

# Getting started

First things first: install HTypes:

```scala
libraryDependencies += "com.svenvandam" %% "htypes" % "0.0.1"
```

HTypes is available for Scala 2.13, 2.12 and 2.11

To have all goodness of HTypes available in one go, do the following:

```scala
import com.svenvandam.htypes.Implicits._
```

That's it! You now have all extensions to the client API available to you. Lets see what these are.

# Conversion to Scala collection

The first improvement is a very simple one. 
When doing a `scan` on HBase, the client will hand you a `ResultScanner`.
This can more or less be seen as a list of `Result`'s, but we cannot directly treat it as a collection.
HTypes provides an implicit conversion to an `Iterable[Result]`.
This has the advantage that you now `map`, `filter` and `fold` away on the retrieved results.

```scala
import org.apache.hadoop.hbase.client._
import com.svenvandam.htypes.converters.ScalaConverter._ // for ResultScanner syntax

val table = conn.getTable() // assuming you already have your connection set up

val scan = new Scan().addColumn("family".getBytes, "qualifier".getBytes)

val results: ResultScanner = table.getScanner(scan)
results.map { result => // this would normally not be possible
  result.getRow()
}
```

This improvement gives you a lot of flexibility with the `ResultScanner` out of the box.
Note that you can achieve this without HTypes by importing scala/java converters provided by the scala stdlib and calling `.asScala` on your `ResultScanner`.

# Asynchronous queries

An issue I encountered with the client was that the execution of queries is blocking by default.
Having your code wait for the completion of a query on possibly petabyes of data (that is the scale HBase is designed for) can result in unnecessary slow programs.
HTypes provides a couple of asynchronous methods to `Table` objects which will wrap the execution of your query in a `Future`.
This makes that your program can continue to run while the query is running in the background and handle the results when they come in.
The available methods are:
* `getScannerAsync(scan: Scan)(implicit ec: ExecutionContext): Future[ResultScanner]`
* `getAsync(get: Get)(implicit ec: ExecutionContext): Future[Result]`
* `putAsync(put: Put)(implicit ec: ExecutionContext): Future[Unit]`
* `deleteAsync(delete: Delete)(implicit ec: ExecutionContext): Future[Unit]`

The meaning of these methods is straightforward.
An example of how this can be used:
```scala
import concurrent.ExecutionContext.Implicits.global
import org.apache.hadoop.hbase.client._
import com.svenvandam.htypes.async.TableSyntax._ // for additional table syntax

val table: Table = conn.getTable()
val get = new Get("rowKey".getBytes)

val f: Future[Result] = table.getAsync(get)

// continue with the rest of your code
```

# Conversion between objects and database representations

















-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HTypes is a simple Scala extension to the Apache HBase API.
It adds two improvements to the existing API:

* Asynchronous execution of I/O operations
* Object-relation mapping (ORM)

## Installation

TODO

## Usage
To get started easily, simply import all members of `Implicits`.

```scala
import com.svenvandam.htypes.Implicits._
```

This will make all extensions to the HBase API available to you.

### Asynchronous interactions

HTypes provides asynchronous operations by extending the HBase `Table` class with the following methods:
* `getScannerAsync(scan: Scan)`
* `getAsync(get: Get)`
* `putAsync(put: Put)`
* `deleteAsyncAsync(delete: Delete)`

The behaviour of these methods is almost self-explanatory.
It calls the related methods on table and wraps the result in a `Future`.
This can be used as follows:

```scala
import concurrent.ExecutionContext.Implicits.global
import org.apache.hadoop.hbase.client._
import com.svenvandam.htypes.async.TableSyntax._ // for additional table syntax

val table: Table = conn.getTable(...)
val get = new Get("rowKey".getBytes)

val f: Future[Result] = table.getAsync(get)

// continue with the rest of your code
```

### ORM

To easily construct objects from/to a `Result`, HTypes introduces a couple of typeclasses which allow for easy conversions between fetched results and objects.
These typeclasses are:

* `HBaseDecoder`, to create objects from a fetched results.
* `HBaseEncoder`, to transform objects to mutation queries
* `HBaseCodec`, a combination of the two above
* `HBaseClassEncoder`, to transform classes to a set of associated columns

The encoder and decoder describe mappings between objects of class `A` and objects of class `Row`.
`Row` is defined as follows:

```scala
case class Column(family: String, qualifier: String)
case class CellValue(value: Array[Byte], timestamp: Long)

case class Row(key: String, values: Map[Column, CellValue])
```

The `HBaseClassEncoder` does not describe how to construct a `Row` but rather which `Column`'s should be fetched to instantiate objects.
When implicit typeclass instances are in scope, the syntax of the HBAse client API is be enriched.
`Result` and `ResultScanner` need a `HBaseDecoder[T]` to construct objects of type `T`.
`Get` and `Scan` need a `HBaseClassEncoder[T]` to add the columns required to construct a `T` to the query.
`Put` and `Delete` need a `HBaseEncoder[T]` to add a `T` to  the query.

An example:

```scala
case class User(name: String, age: Int)

implicit val userDecoder = new HBaseDecoder[User] {
  def decoder(row: Row): Option[User] = for {
    ageB <- row.values.get(Column("profile", "age"))
  } yield User(
    row.key,
    Bytes.toInt(ageB)
  )
}

val table = conn.getTable(...)
val get = new Get("Jack".getBytes).addColumn("profile".getBytes, "age".getBytes)

val user: Iterable[(User, Long)] = table.get(get).as[User]
```

Note that we get an `Iterable[(User, Long)]`. We get an `User` at each timestamp where we had enough data to construct one!

#### Transforming typeclasses

For if you are in to that sort of thing, `Transformers` defines functor instances from the `cats` library.
Concretely, `HBaseDecoder` has a `Functor`, `HBaseEncoder` has a `Contravariant` and `HBaseCodec` has an `Invariant`.
